Space Resources Roundtable II (2000)

7030.pdf

MINE PLANNING FOR ASTEROID OREBODIES. L. S. Gertsch1 and R. E. Gertsch2, Michigan Technological University, Mining Engineering, 1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton, MI 49931-1295, 1lgertsch@mtu.edu, 2rgertsch@mtu.edu.

Introduction: Given that an asteroid (or comet) has been determined to contain sufficient material of value to be potentially economic to exploit, a mining method must be selected and implemented. This paper discusses the engineering necessary to bring a mine online, and the opportunities and challenges inherent in asteroid mineral prospects. The very important step of orebody characterization is discussed elsewhere.
The mining methods discussed here are based on enclosing the asteroid within a bag in some fashion, whether completely [1] or partially [2], [3]. In general, asteroid mining methods based on bags will consist of the following steps. Not all will be required in every case, nor necessarily in this particular sequence. Some steps will be performed simultaneously. Their purpose is to extract the valuable material from the body of the asteroid in the most efficient, cost-effective manner possible. In approximate order of initiation, if not of conclusion, the steps are:
1. Tether anchoring to the asteroid. 2. Asteroid motion control. 3. Body/fragment restraint system placement. 4. Operations platform construction. 5. Bag construction. 6. Auxiliary and support equipment placement. 7. Mining operations. 8. Processing operations. 9. Product transport to markets. Anchoring and Tethering: Before mining or processing can begin, the asteroid must be under control and the machinery and people must be fixed firmly to it. This will require a suite of robust anchoring systems to which tethers can be attached, for example: 1. Single sling around asteroid. 2. Multiple slings around asteroid. 3. Penetration anchor. 4. Expansion anchor in drilled hole. 5. Friction anchor in drilled hole. 6. Glued (grouted) anchor in drilled hole. Slings rely on the cohesion of the asteroid as a whole, a quality that recent findings are putting into question [4]. Point anchors rely on the tensile strength of the asteroid material. Geologic materials are always weak in tensile strength, with the lone potential exception of pure metallic bodies unweakened by rock inclusions. The drill-and-place systems are mechanically similar to each other, but differ in placement method. The most likely scenarios will include several types of anchor systems at various stages in the mine develop-

ment. Slings may be applicable during the stages of processing when the asteroid loses its cohesiveness.
Asteroid Motion Control: If motion control is necessary, it should begin soon after placement of tethers strong enough to withstand the necessary forces. It is not clear that de-spin will always be necessary or desirable, because the rotational energy of the asteroid may be usable to assist transport of rock. This would have to be coordinated with the planned sequence of fragmentation.
Restraint System: A network of cable and/or structures will be necessary to bind the body together and control it while it is under attack by the mining process. It must prevent catastrophic failures, such as splitting, slabbing, or unwanted rubblization, resulting from motion control or mining. Even when an asteroid experiences engineered fragmentation, a wide range of uncontrolled failure types is possible. Asteroid restraint can be accomplished in several ways, which can be combined as the situation requires:
1. Anchor and tether wrap. 2. Cable cage. 3. Rigid cage. 4. Bag. The level of difficulty involved in these restraint methods increases from the tether wrap to the rigid cage concept. Operations Platforms: Full-scale operating platforms will be set up after the major tethers and restraint systems, since platform construction needs a staging area. The design specifics of secure working platforms from which to attack the asteroid will depend on the mining method. The requirements of both the mining and the processing systems will have to be fully addressed at this stage. A well-designed tether-restraintplatform system will enhance the safety and efficiency of moving equipment and personnel. Bagging: After the asteroid motion is under control and the body is restrained, bags would be placed either around the entire body or covering any portion of its surface, to contain material fragments, to provide a processing vessel, and to provide an operating platform for mining machinery. Bags will have to be lightweight, robust, and flexible in the cold vacuum of interplanetary space. The mechanical and chemical demands of the mining and processing to be accomplished within their confines also will dictate their material properties. Auxiliary and Support Equipment: Equipment selection and delivery scheduling are controlled by the

Space Resources Roundtable II (2000) ASTEROID MINE PLANNING: L. S. Gertsch and R. E. Gertsch

7030.pdf

mining method selected and by the location of the orebody with respect to supply sources and to markets.
Mining Operations: Mining includes fragmentation, excavation, and transport of the resulting broken rock to the processing system. The experience accumulated by humans on Earth over the last several tenthousand years has allowed us to develop numerous minimum-energy approaches to these required steps. This presentation describes how some of these can be adapted to asteroid orebodies. The most efficient and cost-effective ways of achieving this depend significantly on the physical characteristics of the bodies themselves (see table below, from [5]). Not of least concern will be the degree of pre-existing fracturing.

asteroid type ice mixtures friable rock
hard rock
metallic Ni-Fe (massive) hard rock-
metallic Ni-Fe

mining blast, heat, distill
blast, rip
blast, disc cutters
concurrent with processing
blast, heat, rip

processing phase separation phase separation, mech, chem, mag mech, chem, mag
smelting, carbonyl methods mech, chem, mag; smelting

Ice Mixtures and Friable Rock. Ice composite and water-containing friable (easily crumbled) rock asteroids are expected to be weaker than stony and metallic materials. This mining scheme would place these types of asteroid entirely within an impervious, structurally robust bag. Solar energy focused on the body would first melt the water-ice (or free the water of hydration of some included minerals), then turn the water into steam. The pressure generated would transport the mineral-laden fluid via a jet to the processing system through control nozzles built into the bag. Steam jets could serve also as a backup or emergency orbit control mechanism. Material fragments too large for transport by steam jet would collect inside the bag and be subjected to secondary mining, if economically justified. Secondary mining could consist of explosive, or perhaps impact, fragmentation within the bag.
Hard Rock. Two mining approaches suggest themselves at this stage: whole-body rubblization, and sequential fragmentation.
Whole-body rubblization mines the asteroid as a unit, fragmenting it to an approximately uniform particle size in situ using a series of closely timed explosive blasts. This method requires sufficient operating platforms over the asteroid surface to drill the holes necessary for distributing the explosive agent spatially throughout the asteroid [6]. Complete enclosure of the asteroid in a bag would enhance fragment control; a

variation on this theme could use two smaller bags instead of one.
Partial sequential fragmentation is a more common mining technique. Either mechanical mining machines or individual blasts would fragment and excavate the material, throwing the broken rock into a bag anchored over only a section of the asteroid. The ore could then be transported, still within the bag, to a processing module or a storage docking facility.
Metal and Metal-Rock Mixtures. The surface layers of a nickel-iron asteroid are expected to be brittle in shadow, but more ductile in sunlight. Fragmentation is more easily accomplished in brittle materials, so control of the rotation period would become an important supplement to the fragmentation process. In stony-iron asteroids, differential strain due to contrasting thermal characteristics of rock and metal under focused solar energy could initiate spalling-type fragmentation. Like terrestrial open pit mines, mining would proceed inward in lifts (benches).
Processing Operations: The first step in processing ­ comminution ­ is begun by the fragmentation accomplished in the original mining. All subsequent beneficiation depends on achieving the proper particle size, to isolate grains of valued material as individual particles. Then the valued particles must be separated from the waste particles using one or a combination of properties sufficiently different between the two.
The valued particles are concentrated in appropriate form to provide feedstocks for the target market processes. One form of metal concentration, for example ­ smelting ­ will require that the metal be fully melted, then drawn from the three-dimensional molten puddle, transported, formed into appropriate shapes, and delivered to the next step, possibly a mass driver.
Transport to Markets: The value of the material being mined will control the methods by which it is shipped, and the distance across which it is feasible to ship. Valuation of the orebody model will, in the planning stages, determine for example whether it is more cost-effective to move the asteroid near a market before processing, or process it on site and ship the smaller mass of product.
References: [1] O'Leary, Brian et al. (1979) Space Resources and Space Settlements, NASA SP-428, 173-189. [2] Gertsch, R.E. (1992) Space Resources, Vol 3, 111120. [3] Internat'l Space Univ (1990) International Asteroid Mission Final Report, Toronto. [4] Ostro, S.J. et al. (2000) Science, 288/5467, 836-839. [5] Gertsch, R.E. et al. (1997) Near Earth Objects, Annals NY Acad Sci, 822, 468-510. [6] Gertsch, R.E. et al. (1997) Near Earth Objects, Annals NY Acad Sci, 822, 511537.

