Acm Astrmourica Vol. 41, Nos 4-10, pp. 637-647, 1997

Q 1998 M. J. Sonter.Publishedby ElsevierScienceLtd

Printedin Great Britain

PII: !w94-5765@8)tl6g87-3

0094-5765/98519.00+ 0.00

THE TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC FEASIBIUTY OF MINING THE NEAR-EARTH ASTEROIDS.
M J Sonter Mark Sonter Consulting Pty Ltd I Asteroid Enterprises Pty Ltd,
11 Deneland Drive, Hawlhomdene 5051, South Australia. email: msonter@wodd.net fax t61 8 8278 7279

The Near Earth Asteroids are primary targets for resources to support space industrialiiation. Robust technical and economic approaches to project planning feasibility evaluation are needed to evaluate such space mining ventures. This paper discusses the technical engineering and mission-planning choices and shows how the concept of probabilistic Net Present Value can be used to optimize asteroid mining project designs. The generic mission reviewed envisages a lightweight (3 or 4 tonnes) remote (teleoperated) regoliih miner or drilling rig, recovering products such as water and other volatiles using solar thermal power, and subsequently returning approximately 1000 to 2000 tonnes to Low Earth Orbit, using solar thermal mcket pmpulsion. Initial estimates of NPV are highly favourable for some targets.
Q 1998 M. J. Sonter. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd

Introduction

The technology needed to avert comet or

asteroid impact is similar to that needed to

recover the essentially unlimited resources

contained in these bodies. Thus it is desirable

to develop asteroidal resources, both to achieve

wanted

outcomes

(namely

space

induslrialisation. species security, and long term

Prosperity) and to build the capacity to avert

disaster.

This paper nsvisws concepts for mining the Near-Earth Asternids for supply of IIMUIWS to future in-space industrial activities. it discusses
a atender approach for canying out Technical
and Economic Feasibility Studies on proposals for asteroid resource recovery projects.

Future Drivers' for Soace Industrialisation The industrialiiatton and settlement and of space is likely to be brought about primarily by increasing commercial actiiities in space, including the following:

Expansion of trunkline communications, direct broadcast TV, navigation, remote sensing. and meteorological services worth several billion dollars per year from an in-space satellite assets investment estimated to be about 50 billion dollars. LEO satellite constellations will roughly double the annual income of these services, over the next decade.
Commercial space-based production of high value pharmaceuticals, semiconductors, ultrapure crystals, and exotic alloys. Although research work has been done on Mir (in orbit since 1996) commercialisation has been severely delayed by the loss of access to the Space Shuttle, after the Challenger disaster.
The concept of satellite solar power stations (SSPS) is again receiving active consideration,
after a decade of disinterest: the Japanese are planning an equatorial orbit SSPS pilot plant, tiled SPS2000. orbiting at 1100 km altitude, of mass 200 tonnes.'
The feasibility of space tourtsm is being promoted by Patrick Collins and colleagues in Japan. Their market research show that at a launch cost of S2OtYkg the space tourism industry will grow rapidly to several billion dollars per year! Hotels In orbit will be needed, to cater for 10,000 person acwmmodation after some years. Shimizu Corp has developed a plan for such an orbiting hotel, of mass 6000 tonnes.
The future market for mass-in-orbit As a result of the activities described above, we oen hypothesise a oonceptue/ Mwe market Ibr mass in /ow-eHh-o~W (i.e. metals for construction, volatiles to make pmpellants for stationkeeping and for deorbit bum, and unprocessed mass for ballast and shielding against cosmic radiation). The size and rate of development of thii future in-orbit market for materials could easily exceed 1000 tonnes per year by 2010, growing exponentially to tens of thousands of tonnes per year if any of the larger-scale activities 7ake off.

637

638

48th IAF Congress

The large reductions in launch cost promised by new launcher concepts (from the present $lO,OOO/kg down to something like $SOO/kg) wiH prompt a huge growth in the launch market, probably driven initially by tourism.

The Accessibilitv and Competitiveness of Non-

Terrestrial Resources

The natural resources in space include metallic

nickel-iron alloy, silicate minerals, hydrated

minerals, bituminous matter, and volatiles

including water, methane, ammonia, carbon

dioxide, and others. These have all been

detected

either

in meteorites,

or

spectroscopically in asteroids and comets.3 Any

industrial development in space requiring more

than about 1000 tonnes of structural mass or

propellant per year will direct attention to these

materials as ores, in the true mining engineeting

sense.

Raw materials retrieved from non terrestrial sources need not attract the high "airfreight" costs referred to above. This is because the energy requirement to return material from The natural resources in space include metallic nickel-iron alloy, silicate minerals, hydrated minerals, bituminous material, and various volatiles, including water, ammonia, carbon dioxide, methane: and others. These have all been identified either in meteorites, or spectroscopically in asteroids and comets. Any industrial development in space requiring more than about a thousand tonnes of structural mass or propellant per year will direct attention to many of the possible target near-earth asteroids is-much less than the energy requirement to launch from Earth.

In addition, the freedom to deliver the velocity change non-impulsively, means that low power propulsion systems may be considered, and this allows a system that uses solar power and derives its return-journey propellant from the target body, such as asteroidal volatiles.

In-Situ Prooellant Production

The mission velocity Av needed to reach

selected "near earth" low Av target asteroids is

not much greater than that needed to place a

communications satellite in geosynchronous

orbit (GEO). The Av required to m

material

from these targets is very much less than that

requimd to lh?mass into o&it fmm the surface of

the earth, and can be imparted gradually, over

several weeks, thus very substantially reducing

the demands on the propulsion I power system.

If the return transfer can be accomplished using part of the retrieved non-terrestrial mass as reaction mass, such as asteroid-derived volatiles, and solar energy for the power SOW, or onboard nuclear power, then it becomes possible to return to earth orbit very much more mass than the outbound-leg earth-o&tdeparfure mess of the mining-processing spacecraft. This in situ propellant production then allows a high Mass Payback Ratio (mass multiplication. Mass multiplication factors above 100 are the initial aim.
The effect of the above concepts, is that some asteroidal material may be able to be delivered into Earth orbit for a e which is very much less than Earth-launch cost. Thus there will potentially exist a pn%rnaking opportunity for a resource developer who could develop a capability to recovar space-based materials and return them for sale in low%af?ho&t. to capture the developing in-orbit market at its inception.
Orebodies in Soa*
It is necessary to identify the requirements that must be satisfied by an Earth-approaching asteroid or short-period comet to make it an `orebody' in the mining engineering sense: that is, to identify it as a resource source that can support an economic materials retrieval project.
These economic and technical requirements are:
there needs to be a market for the products :) need adequate soectral data indicating
presence of the desired materials (iii) check that orbial oarameters give
reasonable accessibility and Jnission duration (iv) development of feasible conceDts for minina & orocessinq development of feasible retrieval conceDts I!) require positive economic Net Present -V1alue using the chosen engineering concepts.
Like terrestrial mining projects, we find that each asteroidal resource project will have *ts own idiosyncrasies, reflected here in the alternative mission trajectory profiles to be considered.
The following diagram is intended to show how these concepts interact .

48th IAF Congress

639

NEAs as possible

/oREaoD'ES

1

ACCESSIBILITY

4 ORBITAL MECHANICS AND MISSION - DURATION
1
PROPULSION CHOICES

POWER SOURCE

COMPO ITION 5
MINING AND PROCESSING METHODS
1 PROCESS ENGINEERING ANDMASSTHROUGHPUT

\

/

RETURNED PRODUCT

FOR COMMERCIAL SALE t

MARKET VALUE

I +
PROJECTNPV EXPECTATION VALUE +

IF +VE, OBJECT MAY JOIN OREBODIES SHORTLIST

Figure 1 Concepts Flowchart

The above flowchart describes the methodology which has been developed for determining the technical and economic feasibility of a hypothetical asteroid mining project.

Review of Asteroid Resources and Accessibility

-5

Astronomical work over the

last fifteen years has increased the number of

known Near Earth Asteroids (NEAs) from about

30 to about 430. Diivery rate is now in

excess of 50 per year. Asteroid geology has

also advanced dramatically in the last decade,

drawing on spectroscopic and dynamical

studies of asteroids and comets, and meteorite

studies, and reasonabte correlations can now be made between spectral / photometric asteroid types and inferred surface mineralogy. It is now believed that as many as 50% of near-earth asteroids may be "volattles bearing", containing clays, hydrated salts, and hydrocarbons. It has also become dear that there is a continuum from asteroidal to dormant cometary bodies, within the population of NEAS
A matrix of attemative asteroid types and proposed products has been developed, from consideration of meteorite types and project options.

Type C, D. P 8, G I=
Q, s, M

Table 2 Matrix of spectra/ type, infered mineralog_y,. and potential products.

Inferred Mineralogy

Product

day, organic& ice at depth?

volatiles: H20, CO2, CH4

clay, silicate, ?limestone,

volatiles: Nickel-Iron metal

? Nickel-Iron metal

silicates, Nickel-Iron metal

metal, silicates, Platinum

Group Metals fPGh&)

640

48th IAF Congress

In the case of those bodies which are dormant or extinct comets (there are several likely candidates), there may be remnant primordial ices within their cores, and hence they are possible sources of volatiles for future space industry.

Accessibility: In space, the parameter which determines how easy or difficult it is to deliver mass from one orbit to another, is not
distance, but is the required velocity change, A v, needed to perform the transfer.

From comparison of velocity increments for different transfers. it can be seen that it is much easier to go from low earth orbit (LEO) to nearly anywhere in the inner solar system than it is to get into orbii from the earth's surface.

Table I Mission VelocityRequirements (Av)

Earth surface to LEO Earth surface to escape velocity Earth surface to GE0 LEO to escape velocity LEO to Mars or Venus transfer orbit LEO to GE0 LEO to HEEO LEO to Moon landing LEO to Near Earth Asteroid Lunar surface to LEO (aerobraking) NEA to Earth transfer orbit Phobos / Deimos to LEO

8.0 km/s 11.2 km/s 11.8 km/s
3.2 km/s 3.7 km/s 3.5 km/s 2.5 km/s 6.3 km/s ~5.5 km/s 2.4 km/s =l .o km/s 8.0 km/s

Likely low Av targets for initial resource

development are

the `Earth-Appmaching'

Awllo. Amor. or Aten type asteroids; the moons

of Man, Phobos and Deimos; the asteroid

1990MB Eureka, which is a Man Trojan: any

hypothetical Earth-Trojan asteroid; and any of

the Earth-orbit-hugging `Ajunas'.

Asteroid "geography": NEAs are classified by orbital parameters into Apollos, Amors, and Atens. Approximately 10% of NEAs are more accessible than the Moon in terms of required mission velocity for outbound and return trips, and at least 50% of these are likely to be potential orebodies.

Mission Plans and Traiectories

Application of the concepts of celestial mechanics show that 0 simple estimates of "global minimum"
delta-v can ba made, by several methods; (ii) the launch windows for these "global
minimum" opportunities are infrequent, but somewhat higher energy local minima

occur at approx 2-yearly intenrals, for most

NEAs;

(iii) long synodic periods requirements militate

against multiple-return mining missions;

(iv) Earth-return hyperbolic velocity should be kept low;

(v) high-eccentricity targets imply Hohmann transfers, and short mining season at

aphelion;

(vi) low-eccentricity

targets

may

use

continuous-thrusting

propulsion,

and

extended mining season.

There is a growing subset of targets that appear to be intermittently accessible for an outbound Av under 6 km/s, and offering return departure Av under 2 kmlsec.

When we consider the alternative out-and-return trajectories to different target bodies, taking into account allowable stay times for resource extraction, it is found that five different "mission trajectory types' are identified. This is because: . targets may be in `low' or `high' eccentricity
orbits: . targets may have perihelion inside or
outside earth orbit; . transfer from target may be by Hohmann
ellipse or by `continuous thrusting'; . mining season may be `short-term' or
extended; . mining season may be `single-mission' or
`repeating'; . if `short-term' mining season is required, it
may be aphelion-centred or perihelioncentred.

Orbit-matching and synodic period constraints militate against a general `pro-forma' approach to trajectory design. For example, it is necessary for the payload on its return trajectory to inters&t Earth &bit whe Farth is nearb; (and not on the other side ofnthe sun). From a &view of the orbital geometries we c& see that there are various Alternative Mission scenarios available:

`Awllo-Tvpe' (Aoollo or hiah-eccentric& Amor asteroids): Objects with "high' eccentricity, low-inclination orbits demand Hohmann transfer for both outbound and inbound trajectories, because of their relatively high delta-v requirement. Mining season is restricted to a short period during aphelion: AV for return must be achieved in a small fraction of T, the period of the transfer orbit.

This trajectory assumes rendezvous near but before aphelion for minimum Avti ; a `short'

48th IAF Congress

641

aphelion-centred mining season, (for example, a 3 month mining stay); and a post-aphelion departure for Earth-return. with approx 3 month thrusting, fOf minimum Av nhlm,

There is a need to destroy a relatively large return (hyperbolic) arrival velocity. Lunar flyby is of partial use only, because it can remove only 1.5 km/s. This criterion, i.e., the delta-v requirement to achieve Earth-capture, is in fact more demanding than the asteroid-departure delta-v requirement.

Mission duration must approximate the period T of transfer orbii which itself must approximate an integer number of years, to enable rendezvous with earth on return, without a phasing orbit, which would extend the mission duration significantly and impact negatively on Project NPV. To minimise delta-v (deep space), the object's orbit should be `Earth-grazing', i.e., q 11.0 AU.

Short oeriod comet missions: Perihelion rendezvous may be appropriate for mining short-period comets, as discussed by Kuck (1995) because (i) solar insolation is too weak at aphelion; (ii) more importantly, aphelion rendezvous imposes financially disastrous time delays.

Dormant comets may be desirable targets because (i) drilling is assumed to achieve close to 100% recovery and capture of liberated volatiles; (ii) equipment for in-situ melting is likely to be considerably less massive than equipment for mining and processing regoltth (possibly by factor of 10).

This is counter-balanced by the very much higher Av requirement for return, which translates into a requirement for much higher propellant usage on return transfer, and hence a larger `mining' requirement, and by the constraint of a very short mining season.

.Aten_Tvpe': t+oh_e~ntn&

Atens

This mission type assumes a Hohmann transfer to rendezvous with the target asteroid at its perihelion, with a near-aphelion departure after half an orbit stay time. Post-perihelion departure is NM out, because (i) this gives inadequate mining season duration; (ii) there is a phasing requirement : T of transfer orbii cc 1 year, so Earth will not `be there' if return craft sets out from target's perihelion). An alternative mission profile contemplates an aphelion arrival (requiring high Av~ to rendezvous) and a perihelion departure for low

return Av requirement. Whether to choOSe

perihelion or aphelion rendezvous for these "Aten-type' missions needs to ba determined on individual basis, by checking Avti and AVM , and total time of mission.

This implies a "selection Nle": [TX? of transfer orbit to target's pehhelion + T/2 of target's ohit + T/2 of transfer otiit from tafget's aphelion to Earth] is the mission time, and this must approximate to 1.5 years.

Anunas and low-eccentricitv Amon rAriunaTvoel: The "Arjunas', and some Amon, have very nearly circular orbits. such ciost. low eccentricity, low inclination NEAs, may be favourable for spiral, non-Hohmann returns; a characteristic of these trajeotories is the `softness' of the launch window for &Um.

Slow spiral return implies longer mining season, and hence less demanding specifications on mining, processing. and propulsion equipment, and on solar collector. Note that spiral fattim trajectories g&~ be designed to deliver the payload at very small vIyp (hyperbolic return velocity), because the spacecraft trajectory can be made tangent to the Earths orbii. Such low vhypimplies easy capture into HEEO (Highly Elliptical Earth Orbit) by lunar flyby.

Hiaher-inclination.

low

. . eccentntxtv

tam ets:

The overriding characteristic of these missions

is the need for high thrust during passage

through the nodes. Inclination change will be a

major impulse demand, (Av- P 0.5 x i

kmlsec.), so timing of mission phases with

respect to Ascending I Descending Nodes is be

important.

tRuemo

h

A major energy cost of the return mission is to

decelerate the payload so as to achieve Earth-

capture. There are various possibitiiies for

reducing velocity from hyperbolic to a bound

orbit upon return:

rely on propulsive braking, using some of the Astemid-derived propellant; thii is simplest, but undesirable, as it reduces the quantity of material that is available for sale.

rely on aerobraking, using an Earthfabricated, LEO-fabricated, or asteroid fabricated aembrake. May be metallic or refractory silicate. The problem is, to fabricate an aerobrake on an asteroid, by remote means, adds another level of complexity.

642

48th IAF Congress

(iii) use lunar flyby to remove hyperbolic Av. This will naturally insert the returning craft into HEEO (Highly Elliptical Earth Orbit) with no stress on the payload and no consumption of propellant. Navigation and timing constraints must be met, to ensure the requisite low altitude pass over the Moon at the proper time in its orbit to provide maximum velocity loss A maximum velocity reduction of 1.5 km/set has been quoted for a single lunar flyby.4 This corresponds to an object returning on a transfer orbit of Q = 1.25 AU, from an aphelion mining mission: and an object returning on a transfer orbit of q = 0.83 AU from a perihelion mining mission,.
Thus, the most desirable targets for lunar flyby capture are those asteroids with aphelia less
than (say) 1.25 AU, or perihelia more than (say) 0.8 AU.
Amuments aaainst Multiple T&I Scenarios: Repeated returns to the same target asteroid have in general been discounted because:
0) the high required Internal Rate of Return
means that sales receipts of subsequent missions are heavily discounted;
(ii) it is assumed that any later mission to the
same target will be severely `off-optimum' compared with the first, to the extent that a different tamet will be preferable;

(iii) the operator will want to recover the remote miner and refurbish and upgrade it;
(iv) it is assumed that lessons learned after the first mission will dictate modifications to both the equipment and the mission planning.

Conclusions reaardina Mission Traiectorv Tvoes:

0) there are several mission types that can be
identified, each with implications for length
of mining season and total mission duration;
00 Earth-return hyperbolic velocity is a major mission Av demand;
(iii) synodic considerations suggest that "multiple return' missions to a permanentlyemplaced mining facility are generally not
competitive.

Conceots for Minina. Processina. Power. and Prooulsion:

The design concepts discussed here involve the

design for the simplest, minimum mass and cost

product return system possible, namely a

remote controlled or automated mining and

processing plant.

Requirements and

engineering choices for mining and pmcessing

depend on the assumed regolith mineralogy and

bulk handling properties, and on the assumed

subsurface composition and properties, lf the

desired material is to be recovered by drilling.

See Table below:

Type
`cryptocometary' carbonaceous
ordinary chondrite metallic

Tab/e 3 Possible Products and Sources Product and Process

Volatiles

Structural materials

H20, CO2
in-situ fluidization

H20, CO2
thermal dehydration
-_

NiFe metal magnetic separation
NiFe, silicates magnetic separation

NiFe. Platinum Group Metals carbonyl process

I

I

48th IAF Congress

643

Engineering Choices can be identified as follows (underlines showing initial choices):

product:

WA: metal; gases: silicates; PGMs.

process:

drillina with insitu melt and

w;

heat. dehvdrate. ;t~;

condense;

electrostatic

magnetic extraction; carbonyl

extraction.

target

type:

-or

overtly

carbonaceous or hvdrous asteroid;

overtly cometary; S-type asteroid:

overtly metallic asteroid.

power:

solar thermal; nuclear thermal: photovoltaic.

propulsion: steam rocket; mass driver; arcjet.

control:

teleoresence; machine autonomy; manual.

Propulsion and power choices are linked; only a subset is technically and politically viable. Insitu propellant production at the asteroid constrains the system choices to those below:.

Power

Table 4 Propulsion and Power Choices

Propulsion

steam rocket

arcjet

solar thermal

Yes

No

solar PV

No

Yes

nuclear

Yes (no)

Yes (no)

mass driver No Yes
Yes (no)

Assuming that the initial target resource will be water and that the target asteroid type will therefore be `czyptocometary' or carbonaceous, the power-propulsion choice `boils down' to the steam rocket with solar thermal power, following the concepts developed by Shoji and others.
The process choice may be recovery by drilling through surface crust and in-situ fluidization of subsurface volatiles (Kuck Process), or soil collection and extraction of volatiles by heating.
Kck.l Kick'snprocess requires much less in terms of system mass than the soil de-volatilization process, being a requirement for a light drill-rig and a fluids collection bag, plus equipment for filtration, pressurization, and reheating for the drilling I heat transfer fluid.5 Kuck's process suffers from several technical threats: (i) it is essential that there actually be substantial subsurface volatiles for example as permafrost, if not as massive ice deposits: (ii) there is a risk (always present in drilling operations) of loss of circulation: loss of drilling fluid into subsurface voids or porosities; (iii) there is the risk of blinding or clogging of the drillfluid return pathway, or of the fluid recovery and conditioning system; this clogging could be by

fine sediments, clays, salts, waxes, or reaction products.
Reaolith Devolatilization Process: The soil devolatilization process requires a m- ore complex materials handling plant, and must be designed for an approximately ten-fold higher mass throughput than that demanded of the Kuck process. This is because the recoverable water from hydrated soil minerals cannot be assumed to be greater than about 10% by mass. The equipment will comprise a collector, soil pressurizer, grinding mill and heater, solid - vapour separator, volatiles collector bag, tailings disposal, and gas cleaner I reheater I repressutizer.
A review of the mass throughput rates of simple industrial solids handling equipment and pneumatic heater I dryer equipment suggests that a mass throughput ratio (kilograms per day per kilogram of equipment mass) of 200 may be achievable. If this is so, then an equipment mass of 5 tonnes could process 1000 tonnes of asteroidal regolith per day, to produce 100 tonnes of volatiles per day, giving 10,000 tonnes of product in a bmonths' mining season.

644

48th IAF Congress

Proiect Feasibilitv and Economic Selection

Optimising selected physical parameters

Criteria

such as delta-v or Isp does m in general

lead to most economical system.'

Several authon note the important fact that

(present author's emphasis)

time-cosf4-money puts an upper limit on the

allowable project cycle time. and that time from

IA general economic methodology to

capital commitment to initial income from

evaluate schemes for extraterrestial

product sales is critical. Some commentators

resource utiiisation is needed. At the

suggest that it is necessary to achieve an

moment no standaniised method exists

internal rate of return (IRR) in excess of 30K

fof researchers to cornpam the&

per annum, to offset the perceived risk!!

schemes on a common basis. They are

There have been various concepts proposed for mining and retrieval to low-earth-orbit of materials from NEAs, but it has been noted in the literature that means of comparison of mission concepts are not welldevelopad." `. '

not able to evaluate the effects of specific innovations. Each prior study calculated costs differently and set up a different manufacturing scenario without isolating the economic effects of each system component. Thus, quantitative

Robust methods for comparison of different

comparison between these studies is not

asteroid mining concepts, and for choosing

possible.'

between various trajectory, mission, and

engineering alternatives, are needed so as to maximize project economic feasibility.

It is thus important to find a method to compare the financial feasibility of

Some observations from these papers are as follows:

competing space mining proposals, such as: . volatiles from comet core

mission (aphelion

We need some way of quantitatively assessing the m& of a very large number of (competing) combinations of minasites, ores, processes, pmducts, and destinations..... (There is) the very important task of identifying and

mission) . volatiles from comet core (perihelion
mission) . volatiles from Gtype asteroid (aphelion
mission)

evaluating the "big picture'. How can one

. metals and volatiles from C-type asteroid

make these various technologies mesh together to give the best overall system?' (Lawis, Ramohalli, 8 Triffet. 1990 - this author's italics).

. metals from M-typaastemkl . PGMS only from Gtypa asteroid . LOX, LH2 from lunar polar ice

Knut Oxnevad, in "An Investment Analysis Model for Space Mining Ventures' (1991):

. bootstrapping

vs

missions to NEAs

non-bootstrapping

. non-bootstrappad raw mass return from an

`Through extensive sensitivity analysis, it was... shown that launch cost (was) m a

Ajuna . volatiles from Phobos or Deimos

criticalparameter.'

In order to carry out these comparisons, it is

Traditional Mass PayBack Ratio `does not take into account development costs, ditlW?nce br value between mass

necessary to expand the formula for Net Present Value in terms of astrodynamic and the Rocket Equation variables.

launched and mass returned, nor does it

take into account the time-cost of

money." Oxneved went on to point out

that *us

economic comparative

analyses should emphasise NPV rather

than MPBR.

To summa&e, there is an apparent need,

identified by several worken, for a robust

general approach to comparing hypothesisad

space mining projects; and for performing

.

realistic feasibility assessments. This approad,

necessari(y addmsses economic and

Cutler 8 Hughes, 1985, made similar points:

quantitative risk essessment issues.

`high MPBR is not particularly important. Low initial capital is important....

As is now dear from earlier discussion, much study is needed to define realistic projecl

48th IAF Congress

645

alternatives, including :
target asteroids / comets propulsion methods and propellants power sources materials to be reclaimed materials reclaim and processing methods guidance, navigation, and control, both outbound and return autonomous control of mining and processing activities sizing of minimum feasible project, and financial considerations
These choices are interrelated, as selection of a particular option in one area introduces constraints in the other areas. Also, different levels of knowledge and technical maturity apply to the various options. Mechanisms for ensuring political acceptance of a right to mine the resource are also critically important.

NPV Discussion and formula derivation

Economic `figures of merit, used to assess

financial feasibility of proposed projects are:

m

( = Net Investment I Net Yearly

Cash Benefit ) for quick analysis, and:

Net Present- Value, as a more accurate

measure of proiect merit over a project time

period of (say) ;p to 10 years. Internal Rate of

Return (IRR) is the discount rate at which NPV

equals zero. i.e., is the implied interest rate that

the project pays its owners.

Mining companies (and more generally, banks

and other large investors) regard a project that

can pay back its capital in 3 or 4 years as

attractive, and one which will take 10 or more

years as unattractive.

Considerations of

attaining strategic politicel or market positioning

may however ovenkfe these rules of thumb.

NPV calculates the present value of receipts of money to be received "n. years in the future, taking into account the foregone interest that the invested money could have been earning. The longer you have to wait for the income, the less present worth it has, and the more heavily discounted it must be, in the NPV calculation.

It is necessary to carry out a Sensitivity Analysis, to answer the questions:
. what happens if costs to LEO drop to (say) $SOO/kg? (or $2OO/kg?)
. what if lunar LOX, or even LH2 are deliverable to LEO at (say) $SOOnCg?
. what if market size is only 500 tonnes per year in LEO?
. if we increase output by 50 or 100% can we still sell it?
A Reliability or Probability-of-Success Analysis is also needed:
A good Figure of Merit for a risky commercial enterprise is `exoedation value of NPV", where the expectation value of NPV, its most likely value, weighted by probability of outcome, is: (NPV)w = NPVl . p1 + NPV2. p2 + NPV3. p3 + ..... where probabilities pi, p2, p3, ._. etc add to = 1.
Net Present Value Derivation & Calculation Process Present Value of a Receipt R obtained in year n is:
PV = R x (l+ij" where i is the interest rate paid for risky investment capital.
NPV in the comet or asteroid mining case depends on:
g@ to launch and conduct the mission magi returned and what you can sell it for time it takes to accomplish
Whilst outbound Av is not critical, except within the constraints of the launcher capability, return
Av must be mirtimised; and duration of mining
season should be maximised, consistent with minimising total mission time and maximising mass returned. The implications for asteroidal or cometary resource return projects are that missions taking longer than (say) three years will have to have very good MPBRs (mass payback ratios), in order for the NPV to be positive.
For the `Apollo-type' asteroid or comet mining case, with a single payload return, using a

646

48th IAF Congress

solar-thermalsteam rocket. the formula for NPV can be expanded as followsg:
For a single payback, NPV= R(1+i)-"- Capital
It can be shown afler expansions that:

space TesoUKS.S, for reasons of accessibility, ease of return. apparent variety of source materials, and pmbable ease -of extraction of both metals and

NPV=S/kgo~~xMmpexfxtx%recovxe

dvtve x (l+i) 4a =)

- (Mmpe+ Mps + b&c) x S/kg manuf + budget x n)

Note that the values Av must be determined
from celestial mechanics for the particular trajectories chosen.
Process for determinino NPV This applies to mining missions with short stay times centred around aphelion or perihelion, with Hohmann transfers out and back; it assumes that the thrusting time on the return transfer is short c.f. the orbital period of the transfer orbit, i.e., less than (say) 20 degrees of arc. It also assumes that capture into earth orbit is via lunar flyby to remove hyperbolic velocity.
The Av to go from HEEO to LEO has not yet
been considered.
The process for determining feasibility is thus as follows: 1. set required payload to be returned.
2. find Av (return) from target body using
Hohmann transfer talc or otherwise.
3. adjust for Av required for inclination change
(i in degrees): 4. from propulsion system Isp, calculate
propellant requirement; 5. determine mining stay time, and assume
some recovery (say 10% of bulk feed); hence determine power reqd by miner to process reqd quantity of volatiles. 6. using same power source, derive "bum time' cutve, and from it check mass returned. 7. calculate elapsed time from period of transfer orbit. 6. insert all variables into formulae above, and calculate Expectation NPV for the success scenario, realising that the probability of success is less than unity.
Conclusioq
The findings of the author's studies into asteroid mining feasibility are therefore as follows:
1. Some Near-Earth Asteroids offer very promising targets as future orebodies for in-

volatiles, both of which are likely to be in heavy demand during the development of large-scale space infrastructure.

Such space resources will have to compete
against Earth-launched resources. This may be made possible by applying the concepts of in-situ propellant production.

Asteroid - comet genesis of target body determines whether regolith-reclaim or drilland-melt is to be the recovery process of choice. A matrix of mineralogy / product / process choices was developed.

Near-Earth

Asteroid geography

is

characterised by orbit location and type.

The discovery rate of NEAs is now quite

high, and there are an increasing number of

`likely' targets being identified.

A major problem is that only a small proportion of NEAs have been spectrally classified, hence their surface composition is not known. Major work is needed in order to define the mineralogically acceptable `short-list'.

Target accessibility depends on velocity
change Av to inject into transfer orbit, plus the velocity change needed to rendezvous with the target. `Global minima' of delta-v values can be estimated, by several methods. When serious work begins on asteroid mining projects, actual datespecific mission velocity requirements will have to be calculated, for the various project alternatives.

Ease of return depends on the asteroid

departure delta-v, and on the hyperbolic

velocity at Earth-return. Propulsive capture

will be expensive inasmuch as it consumes

otherwise-saleable

returned volatiles.

Lunar flyby gravity capture is suggested as

a way to remove hyperbolic velocity,

although it will place a time constraint on

48th IAF Congress

647

the return dates. Aerobraking is another alternative. Further work is needed in `capture technology'.

5. Considerations of mission ptofileS suggests a classification into five types: . high-eccentricity, aphelion mining season (Apollo-type') . -Aten-type'
. spiral low thrust (low-eccentricity Amor or `Ajuna type")
. high inclination, low eccentricity . high-e, perihelion mining season
(`Comet-type")

In general, return missions to a particular body are not apparently advantageous, c.f. a new target.

6. Mining and processing methods can be readily conceptualised. However, there are many areas requiring study: anchoring into regolith on a body which has milli-g gravity; collection and handling material in milli-g gravity; minimum temperature and most rapid heat pulse for adequate volatiles release; system integration and minimum mass for required throughput.

Control via teleoperation and trained machine intelligence will require successful developments in neural net and fuzzy logic machine learning and robotics.

7. Propulsion and power options review tends

to focus on solar-thermal systems for the

initial projects; PV power and afcjet are not

excluded. Ultra-lightweight solar collector

technology already exists.

System

integration has not yet even commenced

but should be a straightforward engineering

task.

8. Project economics is driven by the mission velocity requirements, by the propulsion system characteristics (particularly Isp), and by project time duration and time-costof-money.

A cost delivered into LEO of probably $2OO/kg or so will be necessary for space raw materials resources recovery to be a viable competitor against Earth-launch cost in the first few decades of the next century.

A "spider diagram' has been developed which clearly shows the inter-relationship of all relevant variables. This, together with the formulation of project Net Present

Value in astronautical and celestial mechanics variables, enables a systematic `roadmap' approach to project feasibility determination.
In conclusion, this work provides a rigorous approach for performing Feasibility Studies on the asteroid and comet mining ventures of the early years of the next century , and in addition shows how NPV can be used as a `designdriver' and reality check in project concept selection and development.

References:

(1) Nagatomo, M: "An Approach to Develop
Space Solar Power as a New Energy
System for Developing Countries'. Solar Energy s No I ppl 11-i 18,1996.

(2) Collins, P. et. al.:

"Commercial

Implications of Market Research on Space

Tourism'.

19th International Symposium on Space

Technology and Science, ISAS, Yokohama,

1994.

(3) Lewis, J, & Hutson, M: "Asteroidal Resource Opportunities Suggested by Meteorite Data', h Resources of Near-
Earth Space, Lewis et.al., eds., University. of Arizona Press, 1993.

(4) O'Leary, B: "Asteroidal Resources for

Space Manufacturing",

h Space

Industrialization, ed. O'Leary, CRC Press,

1982.

(5) Kuck, D: "The Exploitation of Space Oases" h The Princeton Conference on Space Manufacturing, SSI, Princeton, 1995.
(8) Cutler, A, 8 Hughes, M: `Transportation Economics for Extraterrestrial Resource Utilization', AlAA/SSl, 1985.
0 Lewis, J. Ramohalli. K, 8 Triffet, T: `Extraterrestrial Resource Utilization for Economy in Space Missions', IAF, 1990.
(8) Oxnevad, K: "An Investment Analysis Model for Space Mining Ventures`. IAF. 1991.
(91 Sonter, M: "The Technical and Economic
Feasibility of Mining the Near-earth Asteroids", MSc (Hons) Thesis, 1998, Dept. of Physics and Dept. of Civil, Mining 8 Engineering, University. of Wollongong, NSW, Australia.

